---
title: 'ELLIS Amsterdam Winter School on Foundation Models'
date: 2026-04-03
permalink: /posts/2026/04/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - summer schools
---

Last week, I attended the Foundation Models Winter School hosted by the European Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems (ELLIS) in Amsterdam. 

Agenda
======

Day 1:
The first day started with Saining Xie (NYU Courant, AMI Labs) explaining why visual representation still matters, Hinrich Schütze (ELLIS Munich) shedding light on internal representations, and Pascal Mettes (ELLIS Amsterdam) introducing hyperbolic foundation models - which almost felt like a political campaign against the Euclidean space. 
Day 2:
Robert Geirhos (Google DeepMind) opened the day with 10 personal insights from 10 years of research.
- when to get off the horse
- where to fish (research topics)
- work smart not hard (no need to work until midnight if planning is done right)
- intersection what we know and what is true != what we think to be true. Some things we think to be true but aren't proven yet -> also research area
and offered insights into how video models can help spatial understanding,

Ekaterina Shutova (ELLIS Amsterdam) spoke about challenges when developing multilingual LLMs, Yossi Gandelsman (Reve, former UC Berkeley) shared his research on model hijacking and steering.



Konstantinos Derpanis (York University) revisited interpretability through the lens of universal concepts, Frank Hutter (ELLIS Tuebingen) highlighted the growing role of foundation models in tabular data, and Panel discussion with Robin Rombach (Black Forest Labs), Frank Hutter (Prior Labs) and Cees Snoek. 

During the panel discussion “From Research to Real-World Impact: Building European Value through Foundation Models”, academics seemed to shift their focus once speaking as startup founders, emphasizing the constraints of European regulations rather than the advantages of designing systems that reflect our values. Hopefully, future founders will take a different approach. On a more positive note, a poster session featuring the PhD students’ research offered a glimpse into some exciting ongoing research and left me feeling optimistic about what’s ahead.


Day 4:
On the last day, Nuria Oliver (ELLIS Alicante) began by reflecting on how our own human biases manifest in foundation models, illustrated by the example of lookism, before presenting work on how effective LLMs can jailbreak one another. 
Elisa Ricci (ELLIS Trento) closed the winter school by emphasizing the need to move beyond accuracy and toward trust.


Finally, when it comes to safety, many speakers touched on the topic, but the focus often seemed to lean more toward finding ways to break the system than toward building architectures that ensure safety. Safety assurance for foundation models is clearly very hard, but that’s exactly why it should get more attention, not less.
 

Poster sessions
======

Takeaways
------
